.TH MDED 8 "2026-05-19" "MDE 2.0.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
mded \- MDE Mesh control plane daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mded
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I SUBCOMMAND
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mded
is the v2.0.0 successor to
.B mackesd(8).
A single-binary, single-PID Rust meta-daemon that owns the
authoritative mesh control plane state (SQLite store under
\fI/var/lib/mde/mded.db\fR) plus the in-process worker pool:
clipboard watcher, mDNS relay, mesh FUSE supervisor, media-sync,
remmina-sync, ansible-pull, KDE-Connect bridge, heartbeat,
notifications server (org.freedesktop.Notifications), and the
cross-peer notification relay.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B serve
Boot the tokio runtime, start every registered worker, and block
on SIGTERM/SIGINT. This is the systemd ExecStart for
.BR mded.service .
.TP
.B migrate
Apply every pending SQLite migration against the store. Idempotent.
.TP
.B status
Print the applied-migration count + db path.
.TP
.B healthz
Print the live HealthReport as a JSON line.
.TP
.B enroll \-\-passcode \fIPASSCODE\fR [\-\-name \fINAME\fR]
Mint a fresh Ed25519 identity + bearer token; print the signed
EnrollmentRequest the leader ingests.
.TP
.B decommission \fINODE_ID\fR [\-\-force]
Soft-delete the node row + emit a hash-chained Lifecycle event.
.TP
.B reenroll \fINODE_ID\fR
Refresh the node's credentials (new Ed25519 identity); preserves
history.
.TP
.B peers\-why \fINODE_ID\fR
Print the reason chain explaining every expected peer relationship
for the named node.
.TP
.B fleet push\-setting \fIKEY\fR \fIVALUE\fR [\-\-peers \fISELECTOR\fR] [\-\-author \fIAUTHOR\fR] [\-\-dry\-run]
Push a settings revision to a peer selection.
.TP
.B revisions list [\-\-json]
List every desired_config revision (descending by id).
.TP
.B revisions diff \fIFROM\fR \fITO\fR
Diff two revisions' spec_json payloads.
.TP
.B revisions rollback \fITARGET_ID\fR [\-\-author \fIAUTHOR\fR] [\-\-peers \fISELECTOR\fR]
Write the named revision's payload as a fresh applied revision.
.TP
.B inventory\-legacy [\-\-mesh\-only] [\-\-json]
Walk \fI~/.config/mackes-shell/\fR + \fI~/.cache/mackes/\fR +
\fI~/.qnm-sync/\fR for legacy artifacts; print a catalog.
.TP
.B import\-legacy [\-\-dry\-run]
Import legacy artifacts into the mded store.
.TP
.B audit\-verify
Walk the events table's hash chain. Exits 0 on Intact/Empty, 1
on Break.
.TP
.B generate\-passcode
Print a fresh 16-character URL-safe shared passcode.
.TP
.B rotate\-passcode
Same as generate-passcode; reminds the operator to update
libsecret.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MACKESD_DB
Override the SQLite store path. Defaults to
\fI/var/lib/mde/mded.db\fR.
.TP
.B MDE_HOME
Defaults the store path under \fI<MDE_HOME>/mded.db\fR. The
v1.x \fBMACKESD_HOME\fR is honored as a one-release fallback
(deprecated; removed in v2.1).
.TP
.B QNM_SHARED_ROOT
Override the QNM-Shared sync root (defaults to
\fI~/QNM-Shared\fR).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/mde/mded.db
Authoritative SQLite store.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/mackesd.service
systemd unit; ExecStart is
.BR "mded serve" .
.SH SEE ALSO
.B mde(1),
.B mde-session(1),
.B mde-shell-migrate-v2(1)
.SH AUTHORS
Matt Mackes <matthewmackes@gmail.com> and contributors.
